# Data Visualization with D3

D3.js, or D3, stands for Data Driven Documents. D3 is a JavaScript library to create dynamic and interactive data visualizations in the browser. It's built to work with common web standards, namely HTML, CSS, and Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG).

D3 takes input data and maps it into a visual representation of that data. It supports many different data formats. D3 lets you bind (or attach) the data to the Document Object Model (DOM). You use HTML or SVG elements with D3's built-in methods to transform the data into a visualization.

## Add Document Elements with D3

The select() method selects one element from the document. It takes an argument for the name of the element you want and returns an HTML node for the first element in the document that matches the name. Here's an example:

>const anchor = d3.select("a");

The above example finds the first anchor tag on the page and saves an HTML node for it in the variable anchor. You can use the selection with other methods. The "d3" part of the example is a reference to the D3 object, which is how you access D3 methods.

Two other useful methods are append() and text().

The append() method takes an argument for the element you want to add to the document. It appends an HTML node to a selected item, and returns a handle to that node.

The text() method either sets the text of the selected node, or gets the current text. To set the value, you pass a string as an argument inside the parentheses of the method.

Here's an example that selects an unordered list, appends a list item, and adds text:

```
d3.select("ul")
  .append("li")
  .text("Very important item");
```

D3 allows you to chain several methods together with periods to perform a number of actions in a row. Example:
```
<body>
  <script>
    d3.select("body")
      .append("h1")
      .text("Jashan Bansal")  
  </script>
</body>
```

## Select a Group of Elements with D3

D3 also has the selectAll() method to select a group of elements. It returns an array of HTML nodes for all the items in the document that match the input string. Here's an example to select all the anchor tags in a document:

> const anchors = d3.selectAll("a");

## Work with Data in D3

The D3 library focuses on a data-driven approach. When you have a set of data, you can apply D3 methods to display it on the page. Data comes in many formats, but this challenge uses a simple array of numbers.

The first step is to make D3 aware of the data. The data() method is used on a selection of DOM elements to attach the data to those elements. The data set is passed as an argument to the method.

A common workflow pattern is to create a new element in the document for each piece of data in the set. D3 has the enter() method for this purpose.

When enter() is combined with the data() method, it looks at the selected elements from the page and compares them to the number of data items in the set. If there are fewer elements than data items, it creates the missing elements. These methods take a data set and, together with the append() method, create a new DOM element for each entry in the data set.

```
<body>
  <ul></ul>
  <script>
    const dataset = ["a", "b", "c"];
    d3.select("ul").selectAll("li")
      .data(dataset)
      .enter()
      .append("li")
      .text("New item");
  </script>
</body>

```
## Work with Dynamic Data in D3

The D3 text() method can take a string or a callback function as an argument:

>selection.text((d) => d)

In the example above, the parameter d refers to a single entry in the dataset that a selection is bound to.

```
<body>
  <script> 
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    d3.select("body").selectAll("h2")
      .data(dataset)
      .enter()
      .append("h2")
      .text((d)=>d + " USD")
      .style("font-family", "verdana");
  </script>
</body>
```

## Add Inline Styling to Elements

D3 lets you add inline CSS styles on dynamic elements with the style() method.

The style() method takes a comma-separated key-value pair as an argument. Here's an example to set the selection's text color to blue:

>selection.style("color","blue");

## Change Styles Based on Data

You can use a callback function in the style() method to change the styling for different elements.

For example, you may want to color a data point blue if has a value less than 20, and red otherwise. You can use a callback function in the style() method and include the conditional logic. The callback function uses the d parameter to represent the data point:

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    d3.select("body").selectAll("h2")
      .data(dataset)
      .enter()
      .append("h2")
      .text((d) => (d + " USD"))
      .style("color", (d)=> {
        if(d<20) return "red";
        else return "green";
      }) 
  </script>
</body>
```

## Add Classes with D3

Using a lot of inline styles on HTML elements gets hard to manage, even for smaller apps. It's easier to add a class to elements and style that class one time using CSS rules. D3 has the attr() method to add any HTML attribute to an element, including a class name.

The attr() method works the same way that style() does. It takes comma-separated values, and can use a callback function. Here's an example to add a class of "container" to a selection:

>selection.attr("class", "container");

```
<style>
  .bar {
    width: 25px;
    height: 100px;
    display: inline-block;
    background-color: blue;
  }
</style>
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    
    d3.select("body").selectAll("div")
      .data(dataset)
      .enter()
      .append("div")
      .attr("class", "bar")
   </script>
</body>
```

## Update the Height of an Element Dynamically( Cool )

```
<style>
  .bar {
    width: 25px;
    height: 100px;
    /* Add your code below this line */
    margin: 2px;
    /* Add your code above this line */
    display: inline-block;
    background-color: blue;
  }
</style>
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    d3.select("body").selectAll("div")
      .data(dataset)
      .enter()
      .append("div")
      .attr("class", "bar")
      .style("height", (d) => (d*10 + "px"))
  </script>
</body>
```
## Learn About SVG in D3

SVG stands for Scalable Vector Graphics.

Here "scalable" means that, if you zoom in or out on an object, it would not appear pixelated. It scales with the display system, whether it's on a small mobile screen or a large TV monitor.

SVG is used to make common geometric shapes. Since D3 maps data into a visual representation, it uses SVG to create the shapes for the visualization. SVG shapes for a web page must go within an HTML svg tag.

CSS can be scalable when styles use relative units (such as vh, vw, or percentages), but using SVG is more flexible to build data visualizations.

```
<style>
  svg {
    background-color: pink;
  }
</style>
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    const w = 500;
    const h = 100;
    const svg = d3.select("body")
      .append("svg")
      .attr("width",w)
      .attr("height",h)
  </script>
</body>
```

## Display Shapes with SVG

There are a number of supported shapes in SVG, such as rectangles and circles. They are used to display data. For example, a rectangle (<rect>) SVG shape could create a bar in a bar chart.

When you place a shape into the svg area, you can specify where it goes with x and y coordinates. The origin point of (0, 0) is in the upper-left corner. Positive values for x push the shape to the right, and positive values for y push the shape down from the origin point.

To place a shape in the middle of the 500 (width) x 100 (height) svg from last challenge, the x coordinate would be 250 and the y coordinate would be 50.

An SVG rect has four attributes. There are the x and y coordinates for where it is placed in the svg area. It also has a height and width to specify the size.

Add a rect shape to the svg using append(), and give it a width attribute of 25 and height attribute of 100. 

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    
    const w = 25;
    const h = 100;
    
    const svg = d3.select("body")
                  .append("svg")
                  .attr("width", w)
                  .attr("height", h)
                  .append("rect")
                    .attr("x", 0)
                    .attr("y", 0)
                    .attr("width", 25)
                    .attr("height", 100);
  </script>
</body>
```

## Create a Bar for Each Data Point in the Set

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    
    const w = 500;
    const h = 100;
    
    const svg = d3.select("body")
                  .append("svg")
                  .attr("width", w)
                  .attr("height", h);
    
    svg.selectAll("rect")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("rect")   
       .attr("x", 0)
       .attr("y", 0)
       .attr("width", 25)
       .attr("height", 100);
  </script>
</body>
```

## Dynamically Set the Coordinates for Each Bar and Height

Unfortunately, they were all stacked on top of each other.

The attr() method in D3 accepts a callback function to dynamically set that attribute. The callback function takes two arguments, one for the data point itself (usually d) and one for the index of the data point in the array. The second argument for the index is optional. Here's the format:

```
selection.attr("property", (d, i) => {
  /* 
  * d is the data point value
  * i is the index of the data point in the array
  */
})
```

It's important to note that you do NOT need to write a for loop or use forEach() to iterate over the items in the data set. Recall that the data() method parses the data set,and any method that's chained after data() is run once for each item in the data set.

Each bar has a width of 25, so increasing each x value by 30 adds some space between the bars. Any value greater than 25 would work in this example.

```
svg.selectAll("rect")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("rect")
       .attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
       .attr("y", 0)
       .attr("width", 25)
       .attr("height", (d, i) => d*3);
```

## Invert SVG Elements

The bar chart looked like it's upside-down, or inverted. This is because of how SVG uses (x, y) coordinates.

To make the bars right-side-up, you need to change the way the y coordinate is calculated. It needs to account for both the height of the bar and the total height of the SVG area.

The y coordinate that is y = heightOfSVG - heightOfBar would place the bars right-side-up.

> return 100-d*3 ;

## Change the Color of an SVG Element

A rect shape is colored with the fill attribute. It supports hex codes, color names, and rgb values, as well as more complex options like gradients and transparency.

> .attr("fill", "navy")

## Add Labels to D3 Elements

D3 lets you label a graph element, such as a bar, using the SVG text element.

Like the rect element, a text element needs to have x and y attributes, to place it on the SVG canvas. It also needs to access the data to display those values.

D3 gives you a high level of control over how you label your bars.

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    
    const w = 500;
    const h = 100;
    
    const svg = d3.select("body")
                  .append("svg")
                  .attr("width", w)
                  .attr("height", h);
    
    svg.selectAll("rect")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("rect")
       .attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
       .attr("y", (d, i) => h - 3 * d)
       .attr("width", 25)
       .attr("height", (d, i) => 3 * d)
       .attr("fill", "navy");
    
    svg.selectAll("text")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("text")
       .attr("x", (d, i) => i*30)
       .attr("y", (d, i) => (h-3*d)-3)
       .text((d) => d);
  </script>
<body>
```

## Style D3 Labels

D3 methods can add styles to the bar labels. The fill attribute sets the color of the text for a text node. The style() method sets CSS rules for other styles, such as "font-family" or "font-size".

```
svg.selectAll("text")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("text")
       .text((d) => d)
       .attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
       .attr("y", (d, i) => h - (3 * d) - 3)
       .attr("fill", "red")
       .style("font-size", "25px")
```

## Add a Hover Effect to a D3 Element

It's possible to add effects that highlight a bar when the user hovers over it with the mouse. So far, the styling for the rectangles is applied with the built-in D3 and SVG methods, but you can use CSS as well.

You set the CSS class on the SVG elements with the attr() method. Then the :hover pseudo-class for your new class holds the style rules for any hover effects.

Use the attr() method to add a class of bar to all the rect elements. This changes the fill color of the bar to brown when you mouse over it.

```
<style>
  .bar:hover {
    fill: brown;
  }
</style>
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [12, 31, 22, 17, 25, 18, 29, 14, 9];
    
    const w = 500;
    const h = 100;
    
    const svg = d3.select("body")
                  .append("svg")
                  .attr("width", w)
                  .attr("height", h);
    
    svg.selectAll("rect")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("rect")
       .attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
       .attr("y", (d, i) => h - 3 * d)
       .attr("width", 25)
       .attr("height", (d, i) => 3 * d)
       .attr("fill", "navy")
       .attr("class", "bar")
    svg.selectAll("text")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("text")
       .text((d) => d)
       .attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
       .attr("y", (d, i) => h - (3 * d) - 3);
       
  </script>
</body>
```

## Add a Tooltip to a D3 Element

A tooltip shows more information about an item on a page when the user hovers over that item. There are several ways to add a tooltip to a visualization, now we use the SVG title element.

title pairs with the text() method to dynamically add data to the bars.

Append a title element under each rect node. Then call the text() method with a callback function so the text displays the data value.

```
svg.selectAll("rect")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("rect")
       .attr("x", (d, i) => i * 30)
       .attr("y", (d, i) => h - 3 * d)
       .attr("width", 25)
       .attr("height", (d, i) => d * 3)
       .attr("fill", "navy")
       .attr("class", "bar")
       .append("title")
       .text((d) => d);
```

## Create a Scatterplot with SVG Circles

A scatter plot is another type of visualization. It usually uses circles to map data points, which have two values each. These values tie to the x and y axes, and are used to position the circle in the visualization.

SVG has a circle tag to create the circle shape. It works a lot like the rect elements you used for the bar chart.

Use the data(), enter(), and append() methods to bind dataset to new circle elements that are appended to the SVG canvas.

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [
                  [ 34,    78 ],
                  [ 109,   280 ],
                  [ 310,   120 ],
                  [ 79,    411 ],
                  [ 420,   220 ],
                  [ 233,   145 ],
                  [ 333,   96 ],
                  [ 222,   333 ],
                  [ 78,    320 ],
                  [ 21,    123 ]
                ];
    
    const w = 500;
    const h = 500;
    
    const svg = d3.select("body")
                  .append("svg")
                  .attr("width", w)
                  .attr("height", h);
    
    svg.selectAll("circle")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("circle")
       .attr("cx", (d)=> d[0])
       .attr("cy", (d)=> h - d[1])
       .attr("r", 5) 
  </script>
</body>
```

## Add Labels to Scatter Plot Circles

You can add text to create labels for the points in a scatter plot.

The goal is to display the comma-separated values for the first (x) and second (y) fields of each item in dataset.

The text nodes need x and y attributes to position it on the SVG canvas. In this challenge, the y value (which determines height) can use the same value that the circle uses for its cy attribute. The x value can be slightly larger than the cx value of the circle, so the label is visible. This will push the label to the right of the plotted point.

```
svg.selectAll("text")
  .data(dataset)
  .enter()
  .append("text")
  .attr("x", (d, i) => d[0]+5)
  .attr("y", (d, i) => (h - d[1]))
  .text((d) => d[0] + ", " + d[1])
```

## Create a Linear Scale with D3

The bar and scatter plot charts both plotted data directly onto the SVG canvas. However, if the height of a bar or one of the data points were larger than the SVG height or width values, it would go outside the SVG area.

In D3, there are scales to help plot data. Scales are functions that tell the program how to map a set of raw data points onto the pixels of the SVG canvas.

For example, say you have a 100x500-sized SVG canvas and you want to plot Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for a number of countries. The set of numbers would be in the billion or trillion-dollar range. You provide D3 a type of scale to tell it how to place the large GDP values into that 100x500-sized area.

It's unlikely you would plot raw data as-is. Before plotting it, you set the scale for your entire data set, so that the x and y values fit your canvas width and height.

D3 has several scale types. For a linear scale (usually used with quantitative data), there is the D3 method scaleLinear():

const scale = d3.scaleLinear()

By default, a scale uses the identity relationship. The value of the input is the same as the value of the output. A separate challenge covers how to change this.

```
<body>
  <script>
    const scale = d3.scaleLinear();       // Create the scale here
    const output = scale(50);             // Call the scale with an argument here
    d3.select("body")
      .append("h2")
      .text(output);
  </script>
</body>
// Output : 50
```

## Set a Domain and a Range on a Scale

By default, scales use the identity relationship - the input value maps to the output value. But scales can be much more flexible and interesting.

Say a data set has values ranging from 50 to 480. This is the input information for a scale, and is also known as the domain.

You want to map those points along the x axis on the SVG canvas, between 10 units and 500 units. This is the output information, which is also known as the range.

The domain() and range() methods set these values for the scale. Both methods take an array of at least two elements as an argument. Here's an example:

```
// Set a domain
// The domain covers the set of input values
scale.domain([50, 480]);
// Set a range
// The range covers the set of output values
scale.range([10, 500]);
scale(50) // Returns 10
scale(480) // Returns 500
scale(325) // Returns 323.37
scale(750) // Returns 807.67
d3.scaleLinear()
```
Notice that the scale uses the linear relationship between the domain and range values to figure out what the output should be for a given number. The minimum value in the domain (50) maps to the minimum value (10) in the range.

```
<body>
  <script>
    // Add your code below this line
    const scale = d3.scaleLinear();
    scale.domain([250, 500])
    scale.range([10, 150])
    // Add your code above this line
    const output = scale(50);
    d3.select("body")
      .append("h2")
      .text(output);
  </script>
</body>
```
## Use the d3.max and d3.min Functions to Find Minimum and Maximum Values in a Dataset

The D3 methods domain() and range() set that information for your scale based on the data. There are a couple methods to make that easier.

Often when you set the domain, you'll want to use the minimum and maximum values within the data set. Trying to find these values manually, especially in a large data set, may cause errors.

D3 has two methods - min() and max() to return this information. Here's an example:

```
const exampleData = [34, 234, 73, 90, 6, 52];
d3.min(exampleData) // Returns 6
d3.max(exampleData) // Returns 234
```

A dataset may have nested arrays, like the [x, y] coordinate pairs that were in the scatter plot example. In that case, you need to tell D3 how to calculate the maximum and minimum.

Fortunately, both the min() and max() methods take a callback function.

In this example, the callback function's argument d is for the current inner array. The callback needs to return the element from the inner array (the x or y value) over which you want to compute the maximum or minimum. Here's an example for how to find the min and max values with an array of arrays:

```
<body>
  <script>
    const positionData = [[1, 7, -4],[6, 3, 8],[2, 8, 3]]
    // Add your code below this line
    const minZ = d3.min(positionData, (d)=> d[2])
    const output = minZ; // Change this line
    // Add your code above this line
    d3.select("body")
      .append("h2")
      .text(output)
  </script>
</body>
```

## Use Dynamic Scales

Example: Use the yScale variable to create a linear y-axis scale. The domain should start at zero and go to the maximum y value in the set. The range should use the SVG height (h) and include padding.

Note:
Remember to keep the plot right-side-up. When you set the range for the y coordinates, the higher value (height minus padding) is the first argument, and the lower value is the second argument.

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [
                  [ 34,    78 ],
                  [ 109,   280 ],
                  [ 310,   120 ],
                  [ 79,    411 ],
                  [ 420,   220 ],
                  [ 233,   145 ],
                  [ 333,   96 ],
                  [ 222,   333 ],
                  [ 78,    320 ],
                  [ 21,    123 ]
                ];
    
    const w = 500;
    const h = 500;
    
    // Padding between the SVG canvas boundary and the plot
    const padding = 30;
    
    const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
                    .domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[0])])
                    .range([padding, w - padding]); 
    const yScale = d3.scaleLinear()
                    .domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[1])])
                    .range([h-padding, padding]);  
    
    const output = yScale(411); // Returns 30
    
    d3.select("body")
      .append("h2")
      .text(output)
  </script>
</body>
```
## Place Elements

Scales set shape coordinate attributes to place the data points onto the SVG canvas. You don't need to apply scales when you display the actual data value, for example, in the text() method for a tooltip or label.

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [
                  [ 34,     78 ],
                  [ 109,   280 ],
                  [ 310,   120 ],
                  [ 79,   411 ],
                  [ 420,   220 ],
                  [ 233,   145 ],
                  [ 333,   96 ],
                  [ 222,    333 ],
                  [ 78,    320 ],
                  [ 21,   123 ]
                ];
    
    const w = 500;
    const h = 500;
    const padding = 60;
    
    const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
                     .domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[0])])
                     .range([padding, w - padding]);
    
    const yScale = d3.scaleLinear()
                     .domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[1])])
                     .range([h - padding, padding]);
    
    const svg = d3.select("body")
                  .append("svg")
                  .attr("width", w)
                  .attr("height", h);
    
    svg.selectAll("circle")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("circle")
       // Add your code below this line
       .attr("cx", (d)=> xScale(d[0]))
       .attr("cy", (d)=> yScale(d[1]))
       .attr("r",5)
       
       
       // Add your code above this line
       
    svg.selectAll("text")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("text")
       .text((d) =>  (d[0] + ", " + d[1]))
       // Add your code below this line
       .attr("x", (d)=> xScale(d[0]+10))
       .attr("y", (d)=> yScale(d[1]))
       .text((d)=> d[0]+ " " + d[1]);
       
       
       // Add your code above this line
  </script>
</body>
```

## Add Axes to a Visualization

D3 has two methods axisLeft() and axisBottom() to render the y and x axes, respectively. (Axes is the plural form of axis). Here's an example to create the x-axis based on the xScale in the previous challenges:

>const xAxis = d3.axisBottom(xScale);

The next step is to render the axis on the SVG canvas. To do so, you can use a general SVG component, the g element. The g stands for group.

Unlike rect, circle, and text, an axis is just a straight line when it's rendered. Because it is a simple shape, using g works.

The last step is to apply a transform attribute to position the axis on the SVG canvas in the right place. Otherwise, the line would render along the border of SVG canvas and wouldn't be visible.

SVG supports different types of transforms, but positioning an axis needs translate. When it's applied to the g element, it moves the whole group over and down by the given amounts. Here's an example:

```
const xAxis = d3.axisBottom(xScale);

svg.append("g")
   .attr("transform", "translate(0, " + (h - padding) + ")")
   .call(xAxis);
```

The above code places the x-axis at the bottom of the SVG canvas. Then it's passed as an argument to the call() method.

The y-axis works is the same way, except the translate argument is in the form (x, 0). Because translate is a string in the attr() method above, you can use concatenation to include variable values for its arguments.

```
<body>
  <script>
    const dataset = [
                  [ 34,     78 ],
                  [ 109,   280 ],
                  [ 310,   120 ],
                  [ 79,   411 ],
                  [ 420,   220 ],
                  [ 233,   145 ],
                  [ 333,   96 ],
                  [ 222,    333 ],
                  [ 78,    320 ],
                  [ 21,   123 ]
                ];
    
    const w = 500;
    const h = 500;
    const padding = 60;
    
    const xScale = d3.scaleLinear()
                     .domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[0])])
                     .range([padding, w - padding]);
    
    const yScale = d3.scaleLinear()
                     .domain([0, d3.max(dataset, (d) => d[1])])
                     .range([h - padding, padding]);
    
    const svg = d3.select("body")
                  .append("svg")
                  .attr("width", w)
                  .attr("height", h);
    
    svg.selectAll("circle")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("circle")
       .attr("cx", (d) => xScale(d[0]))
       .attr("cy",(d) => yScale(d[1]))
       .attr("r", (d) => 5);
    
    svg.selectAll("text")
       .data(dataset)
       .enter()
       .append("text")
       .text((d) =>  (d[0] + "," + d[1]))
       .attr("x", (d) => xScale(d[0] + 10))
       .attr("y", (d) => yScale(d[1]))
    
    const xAxis = d3.axisBottom(xScale);
    const yAxis = d3.axisLeft(yScale);
    
    svg.append("g")
       .attr("transform", "translate(0," + (h - padding) + ")")
       .call(xAxis)
        svg.append("g")
       .attr("transform", "translate()")
       .call(yAxis);
  </script>
</body>
```